# 10. What's Next?

# Chapter Overview

By now you should have a solid understanding of the fundamentals of Jenkins.

In this chapter, we will take a look at some of the advanced topics related to Jenkins. And we will also discuss the next steps in your Jenkins learning journey.

---

# Learning Objectives

By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:

* Discuss advanced Jenkins topics.
* Understand how you can participate, contribute and advance in the field of Jenkins.

---

# CLI and REST API

You can perform a variety of operations using the Jenkins UI, but if you are looking to automate routine tasks, perform bulk updates, or troubleshoot, then Jenkins UI might not be the best solution.

Instead, you can use Jenkins built-in CLI (command line interface) which lets you automate many routine tasks such as creating projects, updating projects, triggering builds, creating build agents and many more.

You can also use the REST API to perform these tasks. Jenkins currently supports the following:

* XML
* JSON with JSONP support
* Python

To learn more, please see documentation for [CLI](https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/managing/cli/), [REST API](https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/Remote+access+API), and [Python API](https://github.com/pycontribs/jenkinsapi/blob/master/doc/source/index.rst). 

---

# Organizing Jenkins Projects

As the number of projects on the Jenkins instance grows, it becomes more difficult to view and keep track of them. Jenkins allows you to organize jobs via Folders and Views. You can logically separate jobs for one team, release, etc. You can also create new views and set them as default views.

To mitigate this issue, Jenkins allows you to organize projects using Folders and Views, so you can logically separate projects for one team, release, etc. You can also create new views and set them as default views. For further information, please see documentation for the [Folders](https://plugins.jenkins.io/cloudbees-folder/) plugin.

---

 # Monitoring Jenkins
 
 








